Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Can I ask
you to move a little bit
this way. please.
Yes. that's perfect.
- Hi. I'm Freddie.
I am the Head Gardener.
and Secret Garden
Party is all my fault.
Crazy. crazy ass motherfuckers.
Hot-housing of creative minds
and wreckheads together.
One of those
places that everybody
looked forward to
the whole year.
Secret Garden
was always never really
about the bands
or the headliners.
it was always about the
fact that it's a party.
Being able to bear
your chest and run wild.
Celebrating your uniqueness
and your insanity.
- It kind of goes from
really sort of slick.
and everyone looks
great on Friday.
but by Sunday people are
literally gaffer taping
a wig back onto their head.
- I was struck by the vibrancy
and kind of new frontier
of the whole place.
You know. it
was like a free party.
but it was a festival.
There were rules. but
there weren't rules.
All good things
must come to an end.
- It went from a baby to a city.
- Such a beautiful
piece of land.
You don't want to cast scorn
on the local landscape.
but it comes with
a sort of surprise.
cause you're so aware of farming
as an industry around here.
And then in the middle of it.
there's this magic little
paradise that people can turn up
and ruin over a weekend.
Thing with festivals is. like.
you work on them all year.
and then they only
exist for three days.
We've got a
medium sized town here.
A festival builds
a city. a Brigadoon.
that pops up and
disappears after four days.
It's the land
more than anything.
You come here and you just get
that magic feeling. you know.
And there were 300
people in the first year.
You couldn't have imagined
that it would grow to this.
You go in
and you can be a plumber.
an accountant. whatever.
And you come out as. you
know. Queen of Swords or.
you know. whoever
you fucking wanna be.
And that ability
to inspire people to go
and make their own fun. that
has become what people expect.
I suppose everyone
who's into this scene
in one form or another can
pinpoint that first moment
they came across that
part of the counterculture
that really opened their
eyes. blew their hair back.
For me. it was the
late end of the raves.
- Often overlooked is the
role that anarchic traveling.
free festivals played in the
development of that culture.
you know.
50 People have been arrested.
and the police helicopter
fired out with flares.
The travelers say they won't
be moving on for a few days.
And tonight. the festival still
appears to be in full swing.
We were in all
the papers. you know.
We were called like the public
enemy number one. you know.
We had like police and
helicopters following
us everywhere.
Secret Garden was really
different in the sense that
it kind of somehow managed
to put a lot of that kind of
crazy. diverse stuff into
a slightly more commercial.
in serious inverted
commas. setting. you know.
And for kind of another
generation. actually.
How did it start?
- Kind of by
accident. I suppose.
- I don't know your excuse.
but I literally had no other
option for a decent job
or all. you know. street credit.
- We wanted to do a party.
We thought we would probably
be quite good at it.
- We'd had the idea of what
we thought made a good party.
which was all the idea of
the toys and the involvement.
- The influence is an
emphasis on participation
that didn't really
exist in the UK much
in festival culture
until Secret Garden Party
really took it to
the next level.
where they basically
said to everyone like.
"Don't come if you're
not gonna get involved."
- It's about time and place.
The opportunity to be
something different.
that exists only here and now.
And that's it.
- If you have a really great
time and you are colorful
and you feel that you
are part of the reason
it was a great party.
then those are the ones that
you'll remember all your life.
- There's a moment when.
however delinquent you are.
you finally realize that your
parents are actually farmers.
We have here John and Alison.
- "Hi. do we have
anywhere around us
that we could do this kind
of batshit crazy scene?"
That's wax earplugs.
I hope. Or suppositories.
I was like. "Well
there's the field
around the end of the lake."
Shut the fucking front door.
- Fred took me down to the
field and then he said.
"This is a beautiful field."
And I said. as a farmer.
it's not a very good
field. actually.
And he said. "No. no. no.
You're looking at it all wrong.
It's beautiful.
Look at the lake. the
trees. all the rest of it.
It's a great place
for a musical event."
Now I knew we were not talking
about choirs and orchestras.
- He did tell me that he
was somewhat trepidatious
to be doing that.
- No shit.
And it was such a
good opportunity.
So we decided to
do our own party.
It's pain in the
ass trying to think
of the name for an event.
Anyone who's ever tried to
start a rock band or do the.
you know. will tell
you the same thing.
Listening to Radio 4.
children's. you know.
story time came on and
Secret Garden Party.
- Do I talk to the
camera or to you?
Just to me. just to me.
- Okay. My name's
Eddy Temple-Morris.
I'm a DJ producer. and my
proudest title is Patron Saint
of the Secret Garden Party.
Freddie approached me
through the XFM website
and said that they
loved my show.
that I'd be perfect for this
party that they were throwing.
I thought it looked
and sounded fantastic.
So I said. "Yeah. where
do I sign? I'm in?"
- So we duly did that and
about 700 people turned up.
And a lot of our
friends who went there.
loved the vibe of the party.
loved the freedom
of what you could do
and. you know. the general
style and the culture around it.
- Try and sit up a bit.
might be good if...
I think we got a bit
of a tendency to hunch.
- I'm Ned.
- I'm Maff from The Egg.
- I'm from The Egg as well.
We're a live electronic
dance music stuff.
And we've been
playing Secret Garden
since the beginning.
- Yeah. We have a
friend Grantley.
He said. "There are these people
who wanna do the best party
in the world ever and
they want you to play."
And I was like. "Okay. great."
And it's all really
funny and ridiculous
and eccentric and goodly silly.
- Secret Garden Party!
- It was the start of something
really. really special.
- You're always talking to us.
- Not the giant cock behind you.
We moved here
nearly 20 years ago.
Everyone knows everyone.
My husband's on
the parish council.
and suddenly a party arrives.
And "Oh. we don't want
them. Think of the traffic.
Think of the noise and
they're not even local.
And what do we get out of it?
And I don't want my children
going because that'd be awful."
And then you see these
children who snuck in
at the beginning.
- Back in those days...
- I had no money.
- I didn't have a ticket.
So. I looked for ways to get in.
We'd already invented
the game of trying to find
someone that had
actually bought a ticket.
- You know. I've been there
when the kids are kind of
drunken and disheveled
behind the toilets going.
"Oh. gosh."
- I'm Pete Loveday.
And what is Pete Loveday?
Probably someone
who's been with this festival
for 13 years doing
artwork for them.
How did you get involved?
Just a phone
call out of nowhere.
And it was Freddie.
Cause he'd read
the Russell Comics
and come down to check it out
and see whether I fancy
doing artwork for him.
He'd found a few images there
that probably made him think
that I. I might know what
a festival was about.
And what did you think?
- Well. I thought it was very
small and it was very sweet.
It had one stage.
- By the lake. which is now
the Where The Wild
Things Are stage.
- And the pagoda sorted
being used for DJ's.
- The dance area
was a tree house.
- The magic boots? Do you
remember the magic boots?
- Or the Fuck Yeah bar
with the cars outside
that people pushed
into the lake.
It was the definition of just
fucking reckless abandon.
- Yeah. it was great.
We rocked up and
the moment we started.
it was just one enormous fiesta.
- First time I went
to SGP. I was...
I must have been
dressed as a cow.
- Then shit got really
outta hand for five years.
- Well. I can't remember
the 14th. the second one.
but I certainly can
remember the 13th one.
Why was
that particularly memorable?
- I went down the rabbit hole.
And then I came out and
I was in a couple of mud
with lots of pretty girls.
And with this really
wicked little sound system
that somebody had
made out of bits.
And we were in a tent
that was literally
just kind of half fallen down.
but we were dry and we
were warm and we were
in this little space and
this is the Secret Garden.
It was incredibly difficult
not to let your hair down.
We've gone from literally
three muddy stages to this.
- My sister. Fred's mom. was
slightly tearing her hair out
because each year the festival
had got bigger and better
and the loss had got bigger
and better every year.
They were very casual
about. you know. receipts.
I think we
started getting it quite well
developed in 2005. which
is. I think also when we
started noticing the sort
of quite parabolic increase
in our attendees.
And then 2006 got very popular.
We got very lucky with
a couple of bookings.
- 2006 was like. we'd
booked by accident...
Well. not by accident.
She was brilliant. Lily Allen.
- Go well today?
- Went really. really well.
I didn't think it was
gonna go very well
cause it was raining
and there were no people
out to the front stage.
And then suddenly there were.
- We had people turning
up with picnic chairs
and like they'd printed
out the program.
- They wanted to know where
the information booth was
and we're just like...
- And the best complaint letter
we had in the early years
was someone who thought they'd
found the information desk.
They got handcuffed to
each other and then pointed
to 500 keys hanging
from fishing wire
and told one of these keys
is gonna set you free.
- Everyone harps back
to the good old days.
"The good old days.
My days. my days when
I was coming up."
"Oh. it was magic. wasn't it?"
You know. magical
time. magical time.
- I told my friends I was
going to Secret Garden
and they all kind
of laughed at me.
They were like. "Are you going
to that posh kids' party?"
Back in the day.
it was seen as a posh party
because people wore 60 pound
animal hats and drank Pims.
- I actually ended up doing
my 40th birthday party there.
So I had like 150
people all turned up.
Everybody like in pure white.
- And yeah. it was. it was
quite polite. wasn't it?
- And it was sometimes like.
"Are we running a festival?"
- Fred called me.
And he said. "I would like talk
to you about some festival."
I said to Fred. I said.
"Listen. I'm going
to come with Desmond
and let's see what happens."
- Are ready to sing?
- And when we walk out on
stage. it was in the thousands.
I went. "Oh my God. Secret
Garden Party is born."
- And suddenly like
the time I was going.
they're the best festival ever.
- Honestly. on the
Saturday night.
it really was as if
everyone was. you know.
high up on one thing or
another with a glow stick
sticking out of their nostril.
running around like
blue ass flies.
Been to
Glastonbury fairly regularly.
We didn't go to Burning
Man until summer of 2006.
- If we're being honest.
Secret Garden Party borrowed
a lot from Burning Man.
Which is like an art
festival that everyone's
doing something. burning
something. dressing up
and making. just anything
to get people to interact.
It's still
one of the best parties
I've ever been to because
the people you'll meet.
things to do and interact
with. the creativity
and the capability
that's brought to it.
is just jaw dropping.
- You realize that actually
it is okay to be this
fucking indulgently
bonkers in the whimsical.
- But Burning Man is
a little bit po-faced
and they take it
really seriously
whereas here it was
just all about fun.
Action.
- Can we do it again?
That was fucking shit.
The level of
dedication to nonsense
was unparalleled in any
of the other festivals.
even Glastonbury to
a certain extent.
They took the most bizarre
and weird parts of Glastonbury
and just went pew.
This is the raw bones
of the nonsense.
and we're gonna give it
to you here in one place.
- We made an agreement
with Secret Garden
that I would come here and
make something amazing.
I believe it was like. I
promised a spontaneous miracle.
Nice to have your
own phone line here
and the landline. too. Mom?
Your have reached a number
that has been disconnected.
- I was taken to a barn where
almost all of that stuff
was found. I mean.
this is quality goods.
It's all those cans.
I brought with me
from the last
festival in Ireland.
I had a huge bag. I was
like loitering in. you know.
kind of customs.
Like somebody please ask
me what's in this huge bag.
I was like. "Na. na. na."
You know. looking
suspicious. Nothing.
They didn't want any.
they didn't care.
I wanted to like open
it up and go. "Ha-ha!
You ever seen that before?"
Nothing. And some of the
people were looking at me.
kinda like "You're such a dick."
- In this screwed up. over
health and safety-ised.
very controlled English.
stiff upper lip culture.
Secret Garden proves
that. you know.
we can have the same vibes
as a Favela in Brazil.
at least for a few days anyway.
You know what I mean?
- When I first joined
Secret Garden Party. it was-
- Shambles.
- It was the biggest
circus I've ever seen.
I thought everyone
was going to die
and people were just coming
into the office going.
"I'm just going to
suicide Olympics.
Where's the suicide Olympics."
Are they
literally suicide Olympics?
- Pretty much. It was a
wheelchair on the top of a hill
and they used to just
push people down there.
- So. I mean. I
remember the first year
of watching someone in the
wheelchair go down the hill.
- It was the tractor tire.
That one went all the way
down the hill with the.
with the guy in
it. into the lake.
And that was. and then he
didn't come out for ages.
We were like "Where's the.
where's the guy gone?"
- Well. I think as long as
they don't drain the lake.
We were willing
to give anyone a chance
who had a crazy enough
idea that sounded like
we could execute it
and then develop them
and help them along
the way on that.
- So I used to do this
thing where I would
forge a load of
doctors' prescriptions.
dress up as a doctor and
break into festivals.
And on Sunday I'd walk around
writing people off sick
so they could stay
out and party more.
And I was sitting with
these people drinking
their champagne.
There was someone
there who was chatting
and he. you know. I thought he
was being a little bit cocky.
So I quietly wrote him
out of prescription.
describing him with cock throat
and explaining to
him or his jewels
would start to sink down
into his throat scrotum
and the cock would
come out of hid mouth.
And he looked at
it for a little bit
and he just went. "Are they
paying you to be here?"
I was like. "No. I jumped
over the fence like always."
And he went. "This
is our festival."
And he said. "Okay.
come next time
and bring some people
and do something."
You've talked
about Vito. haven't you?
Yeah. if you say.
have you got a few words to say?
- What? You asking me who I am?
Mm?
- Vito was ridiculous.
Beautifully. happily.
joyfully visible at all times.
He'd say goodbye to
you and he'd say.
"I'll see you in my dreams."
Or something stupid and then
he'd suddenly disappear.
And literally 10. 15 minutes
later. he'd come back
and he was in a completely
different costume
Different makeup even.
And he'd gone back
to his little hole
where he did these magical
things and he'd just get...
And the whole reason for it
was just to make you gasp.
- Think he was particularly
proud of being able
to of coined 'This
is a serious party'.
- And walked around
with his sign on him
He got on stage a few
times. danced with us.
- I mean. I don't
remember the first time.
It was sort of. one
of those things where
he just always seemed to be
around at the garden party.
By the time that he'd got
his iconic sign. we'd met.
- I invited him to
compere for Artful Badger.
He's an incredible compere
and incredible energy.
- I got him to do the.
"Oh. How Lucky You Are"
business from Dr. Seuss.
to open the rabbit hole.
- Ladies and gentlemen. I'd
like to introduce you to.
The Cat in the Hat.
- And he did the entire thing.
- 'No. no. no. no.
no. no. no. no.'
- Verbatim.
- 'Congratulations.
today is your day.
You're off to great places.
You're off and away.'
- Got it completely
right. I think.
- 'You have brains in your head.
You have feet in your shoes.
You can steer yourself any
which direction you choose'.
- We were all going a bit
like. "Can we get on with it?
Can we get on with this? We
wanna hear the band now."
- 'Oh. the places you'll go.
you'll be on your way up.
You'll be seeing great sights.
You'll join the high flyers
who soar to high heights."
- In 2007. me and a
guy called Dickie Cohen
did mud wrestling
at Glastonbury.
It went down really well.
We got some Barbie dolls.
- Not Barbie dolls.
but they were like-
- Yeah.
okay. Cabbage Patch.
- No. they were like
sort of ugly little like-
- Trolls?
- Something between My Little
Pony and a Barbie doll.
I can't remember where. I
dunno where we got them from.
- We put them in
the bowl full of mud
and had them wrestling.
We had like weird legs
and arms sticking out.
And then one arm was
holding a proposal.
- And we put it in a box.
- And then we just sent that
to Secret Garden Party HQ.
We didn't want any money at all.
We just wanted five tickets
and we'd do
everything ourselves.
So in 2007. me and Dickie
hand dug a mud pit.
It took us three days to dig.
And then we just stood
around it with megaphones.
getting people to wrestle.
- The mud pit was just
like a continued success.
And everyone knew it.
Loads of people liked it.
But of course. we
didn't have a lid.
So loads of people slept in it.
Like cuddled in
it. pissed in it.
I mean all sorts like. you know.
people passed out in
it while someone else
was pissing in it.
At like two o'clock in the
morning. I was just like.
"I am not getting
involved in this."
- I can't see. I can't see.
- I remember one year.
I got about 25 people in
and I thought this had the
potential to get quite sexy.
But then there was just a few
guys. just writhing around
and just started almost
fucking each other in the mud.
And it escalated really quickly.
And that was the start
of the Collosillium.
10 years later. it's this
massive 2000 capacity venue.
And we have a strong belief
that we are not the headliners.
It's the crowd.
So then we played
ridiculous games.
'Wax on. wax off'. where
you are on the aerial truss
and you're ripping off
hair with wax strips.
- We had a new game called.
'Whose Anus Is This Anyway?'
Four bums. four girls
guessing the boyfriend's bums.
She's very sure it's his bottom
but she's not sure
about the balls.
- This girl.
beautiful. she decided
that she definitely knew
it was her boyfriend's bum.
And instead of like
just kissing it.
she licked the bum
right in the middle.
- Full crack.
Well that was daring. well done.
- But at least it's
your boyfriend.
- At least it's your boyfriend.
She picked it wrong.
How do you
circumvent health and safety?
- Yeah. You don't circumvent
health and safety.
- When you're creating things
like this in the sort of space
that we are talking about.
we kind of hope people
subscribe to the danger aspect.
What was the guy's name
in health and safety?
- He's actually. he's
asked not to be named
and remain anonymous.
- Truth be told a lot of the
crazies I saw running around.
they were pretty aware of
how insane this place was.
It's this safety third thing.
First. have fun.
Second. have more fun.
And then think.
is this dangerous?
- Even if someone did
come out with no leg.
it was just like.
"Hey. I've scarred my leg
for life. but it's fine."
Not that I think
that's a good thing.
And now we're much more
professional. of course.
We're much more professional.
- It always helps
if it looks like
you've completely thrown
the rule book away
because the public love that.
But you know. at the end of
the day. they're our guests.
We need to look after them and
send them home in one piece.
- The model that all
those guys came up with
was that they got all these
micro venues together.
Each one of those
micro venues was run
by a really cool posse.
They all came together and
each one of those little crews
pulled like a mule.
- There's things. there's
the action counselors.
There's the physics council.
there's the political things.
There's lots of
discussions about stuff.
- Me and Jim were like
obsessed with 9/11
conspiracy theories.
So we were like. "Hey.
let's do a conspiracy camp."
So then I. we invited
all these David Icke's
and journalists
and ex MI5 agents
and all these weirdo's
and conspiracy theorists
into this tent which was
decked out like the war room
in Stanley Kubrick's.
'Dr. Strangelove'.
- Once the foundation
perception of reality is flawed.
everything that comes from
that must by definition.
be flawed.
- The idea of bringing serious
academics and professors
and serious people
into this environment
where everyone's like
naked and on drugs.
And it's all crazy and
hectic and hedonistic.
that really appealed to me.
- Is that a cucumber?
That's a cucumber.
- Cucumber. cucumber. cucumber.
- E.T. phone homo.
- When it comes to like
representing LGBT+ communities
at festivals. like it's
actually really poor.
Glastonbury's championed that
with like Block9 festival.
have done some
good stuff as well.
but like Secret Garden
Party was always
a very open. friendly festival.
So I think lots of gay people
used to gravitate there.
We originally
asked to do a tent.
the kind of ceremony
celebration of coming out.
Someone sent us a thousand
bottles of poppers.
So poppers actually
sponsored the first gay bar.
It meant that our
tent was really busy.
It's sweaty. it's
amazing. it smells of mud
and all the sweat
and human bodies.
And then all of the kind of
chemicals which are coming out
of everyone's pores.
It's a little like
a chemical toilet.
but like kind of sexier.
And it just turns into this
dirty. amazing little ray
that just never seems
to sort of stop.
One guy who sort of
grabbed the microphone.
he was like super nervous.
We stopped the music and he
came out and he started crying.
His friends started
crying. I started crying.
And then the whole tent was
just like weeping for this guy.
And his friends were celebrating
him and they were like.
"Oh my God. we never knew."
And I was like. yeah.
And you look at him and
he's covered in glitter
and I was like. "How
did you not know?"
Having that place where
people can be celebrated.
people can be who they want to
be and be empowered for that
is always what we've stood for.
Come inside my bar.
it will change your life
and the size of your anus.
- Things like
introducing drug testing.
first festival to do that.
- So I'm Henry Fisher. I'm one
of the testers for The Loop.
We provide advice on drug
use and sexual health
for people at festivals
and other events.
Last year was the first year
when we were able to actually
provide multi-agency
safety testing.
So that's where people can
come and bring a little scoop
of powder or a bit of a pill.
or ideally a whole pill.
We then find out
what's in the sample
and we can tell 'em
how strong it is.
So you are not telling people
not to take drugs?
We neither
condone or condemn drug use.
We know it's gonna happen.
So what we're trying to do is
just make sure that they don't
end up in the welfare tent
or worse. in hospital.
That was a great.
great thing to be a part of.
And certainly something
that. you know.
it helps if you're independent.
to be able to make that move.
- Are people who come
to you suspicious?
They were suspicious at first
because it was such a new thing.
Now there's a bit
more publicity.
People have heard us a bit
more. It's been really popular.
We wouldn't
have been able to do it
without the support of
our local police force
who were awesome
in their response.
It's something we'd been
talking to them about
for a couple of years.
And I know when it first
got mentioned. it was a.
a very uncomfortable concept.
The reasoning they went
through was very interesting.
Their primary directive
is the prevention of harm.
Their secondary directive is
the persecution of criminality.
Once you've entered
into the event
and you've gone through the
searches and all that security.
the option for that
second directive has gone.
If you are going to be able
to effectively discharge your
primary directive
of reducing harm.
And this is not an opportunity
to persecute petty.
civil disobedience.
So far. how's
the quality of the drugs been?
- It's been really
variable and it always is.
We've had a few very
strong pills so far.
which is as much
of a worry as well.
We're telling people
to take a quarter.
But then we've had some.
some really awful things.
I think we had some
plaster of paris.
happened to us yesterday.
that someone was
sold on site as MDMA.
- Prohibition has been
doing more harm than drugs
since whatever it is. 1963.
If drugs are. you know.
have a dangerous side.
they should be controlled.
And to be able to at least
used. if they're gonna be used.
in a safe way.
A word of balloons?
- That omnipotent sound.
- So laughing gas. yeah.
Nitrous oxide occurred
through this period
and suddenly everybody
was doing it.
I remember getting
there for the Monday...
No. I was there from
Sunday. I can't remember.
I think I arrived with Ans.
And there's a big.
huge tube of it.
And I had some. and I
blacked out and fell over.
Hit my head on
this picnic table.
And I went to hospital and
I think we played a festival
on the main stage a
couple of weeks later.
And I went on stage and said.
"Laughing gas. right.
it's not that funny."
- It's no laughing matter.
- No.
- When it first
appeared on the scene.
one of our crew started
off with a gas bar.
Yeah. I think you got mentioned
in the same sentence
as laughing gas.
- Never.
- There you go.
- Yes.
- But I did hear it from you.
- I think the people
running it made a very.
very nice little fortune.
I had a girlfriend
who did a nitrous oxide stall
at the Garden Party.
And so we organized
a. a big tank.
It was. it was just
totally fucking ridiculous.
I mean. there's people sort
of burning their mouths on it.
There's people literally
just falling over.
We had to like confiscate it
cause people are still
squabbling over it.
Hippie fucking crack.
- Now the new psychoactive
substance laws come in.
we have gone to it now being
the preferred drug for sale
by organized criminal
gangs at festivals.
Now. if you think about
the upstring on that
and the consequences for
getting caught with it.
it is not really a big win
in that area for that law.
Especially not for us at
the bloody edge of it.
- Are we not here
to talk about music?
- I'm Lissie.
This is like the coolest
place we've ever been I think.
- Yeah.
The new music has
come through the festival.
where you think that
Where The Wild Things Are.
which is a very small stage
kind of built into a tree.
And the artists we've
had come through that.
from Florence and The
Machine and The XX
and Lily Allen and Daughter
and all these kind of acts.
as time gone on.
they then kind of
upgraded to the main stage.
Crystal Fighters were one
of our headliners this year.
on the final year.
They came to the
festival as punters
and it inspired them to start
the band in the first place.
That I think is. is
part of what's important
with Secret Garden Party.
it's inspired. not
just us and punters.
but inspired the
artists as well.
- All of the acts that were
booked into the Garden Party
understood the
ethos of the show.
You can play and we
can't pay loads of money
cause we haven't got it.
cause we spent it all
on fluff and bunting.
And when you finish playing
get in the party
with everyone else.
DJs who are used to getting
paid six figures for a set
would come and play for free.
That's how we managed to bank
all the early headliners.
DJs love playing
at the Collisillium.
We've had Disclosure. Sub
Focus. Chase & Status.
Roni Size. all the
Hospital Records guys
and a whole range
of like massive DJs.
These guys who came
over from America
and came back backstage with me.
Dickie and Frodo
and Timmy were like.
"Say man. what you doing now?"
He's. "Oh man. you know.
I'm just gonna go back
to the hotel. you know."
And we were like.
"No. you're not.
You're gonna come back to
the sweaty lingerie party.
And you're just gonna
take off your trousers
and like wander
around in your pants."
And he is like. "Okay.
I'm gonna do that."
- There wasn't any pandering.
Grace Jones. you know. exception
cause she was a
bloody nightmare.
- She wanted to
have a scissor lift
that kind of brought her up.
But the people in charge
of doing that before.
perhaps they didn't
have the ability
to organize something like that.
So it pretty much was
one of our stage crew
with Grace Jones
on their shoulders.
And he just kind
of went like this.
- You'd never go
to garden party to.
because of the band lineup.
sorry James Brennan
but you wouldn't.
But like it's. you'd go to
garden party for so much more.
Tell us
about that complaint email
that you got from somebody.
- I love it.
- You make it sound like
there's just been
one in 15 years.
We get. you know. depending
on the year we. you know.
you get one or two.
If it's been a very good year.
you. you know. you
normally get one.
A very wet year. you
can get a lot more.
Last year's which
has. we had a love.
brilliant year. last year.
And it was the only real
letter of complaint.
Her major beef was. she
was promised Secret Places
and she couldn't find them.
- Well. sorry for that.
But you missed this secret and
this secret and this secret.
this secret and that
you didn't find them
is not really our fault.
Well. that's the thing about
the Secret Garden Party.
It's about the
little secret things
that actually. for me. make
the festival so wonderful.
- S&Empathy. that was good.
- We did the Dog House.
It's just a little place
where we just play filthy.
dirty. funky dance music.
I seem to remember that
time when we lost the power.
Yeah. yeah. So after
the power went down.
we were following
the blue power cable.
pulling it out the mud tryna
figure out where it had gone.
I went inside a tent. I kind
of unzipped it and went in.
And as I walked in.
there's 200 naked people
having a massive rave.
I didn't even know we
were next to a sort of
secret naked rave tent.
- One of my favorite things
doing was with sunflower field.
Fred built a field of sunflowers
and put a row of
toilets against one side
with the back cut
out of the toilet.
You walk through and then
into this sunflower field.
- We didn't tell her
that the sunflowers
were in the secret places
cause that'd been a bit mean.
Could you state your real name?
- My name's Ian Duff.
What do you do here?
I run the Secret Bar.
- I first met Ian in
2006 and Ian was sort of.
kind of ricocheting behind
the bar and he asked me.
"What day is it?". I went.
"it's Friday morning."
And Duff went. "Fuck. I've
been awake for four days.
I'm going to bed."
And literally just
disappeared off to bed.
Right.
And how many years have
you been doing Secret Bar?
I can't actually
remember how many years.
It's all kind of
merged into one.
Set up the bar. we gave
all the booze away for free
if people could find it.
- Yeah. How did he
ever run that bar?
Who was paying
for all the booze?
- We hid the bar in various
places throughout the site.
And then if they found the bar.
they could have a free drink.
Open to anyone as long
as you can find it.
- I mean. the first few years
we were right next
to Duff's Bar.
Everybody just sort of went
from Duff's to get refreshed
and relax for a little bit and
then come to ours for a quick
hour on the dance floor and
then back to Duff's again.
- As people got
to know about it.
they tended to take the piss.
So we changed it a little bit
to make it a little bit more.
well a little bit
more participatory.
Where the drinks are free
if you're willing to perform
one of several silly. bad
ideas that we came up with.
This year. we've got
the bartender haircut.
topless electric fence limbo.
We tend to make the people
who don't join in. pay.
Right. yeah.
So that. that's how
we kind of make ends meet.
Yeah. fair enough.
- But we never really
make ends meet.
- I remember
actually going to...
I remember. was it last
year the year before?
I'd gone to see Air
on the main stage
and all these girls were
dancing around me. kind of going
"Oh my God. it's like I'm
orgasming. It's amazing."
And uh...
- Who said that? You did?
- No. no. not me.
Some of the girls I
know were like dancing.
the music's like. "Oh man.
I'm just having this orgasm."
So. and then afterwards-
- They said that?
- Yeah. they said that.
- Okay.
- Yeah.
And then we went backstage
and I met the drummer
and I said. "So what's it
like playing drums in there?"
And he said. "Well.
they told me to play
like I'm making love
to a beautiful woman.
but you're never
actually coming."
And isn't that
funny that the girls
all actually felt the
same vibe from them. Easy.
Anyway. we took
him to Duff's Bar
and got them completely twatted.
- Sorry about that.
- Just fucking breaking strings.
I like breaking
strings. it's fun.
Does anyone know where
the Artful Badger tent is?
When Garden Party started
it was pretty camp to watch it.
Garden Party
was reacting to something
that wasn't there
and wasn't being fed.
Suddenly. festival has become
incredibly mainstream.
- There need to be festivals
that have their independence.
And when you have
your independence.
there's a bit of a trade off.
You have to do a dance
with law enforcement
and local authority.
At the same time. it also means
that you're not
swallowing corporate cock.
People are not trying to shaft
something really horrible
and big and unappetizing
down your gullet.
And that is important
because you will have
all the strings associated
with sponsorship.
They're nasty.
- We went to New York and it was
the Woodstock Reunion Festival.
Big corporate love
and peace pizzas
and Pepsi logos and
everything everywhere.
But these kinda topless guys
on stage with oil saying.
let's go and see how much
love there is at Woodstock.
And Woodstock money.
which people ran out of.
And people pulling fences down.
Commercialism.
that's what some people say led
to the fall of Woodstock 99.
Garden Party's always been
that kind of fuck you
to that corporate scene.
We're doing it for us.
We're not doing it to
earn money because like.
who the fuck earned money
out of Secret Garden Party.
Like definitely not any of us.
SGP started organically.
So it requires a lot of
interaction and. you know.
buy in from people.
If you go out to try and
invent and create a massive
counter-cultural
significant thing.
you're gonna end up
with probably something
very different.
Hit the mic.
Let's see whose
headset's still on.
- Oh no. it's stopped.
- Testing.
I'll get
the sound man to see if-
- Yeah. it's stopped.
- Ah. what's that?
- This is the H6.
It's much more superior
than the original zoom.
- There we go.
Secret Garden Party's
contribution to
festival culture.
- So there was a review
in like Mixmag or DJ.
one of those things.
There was actually a
review of V Festival.
It was this whole column
being able to site
and this band. and this
band. and this band.
and this band. and this band.
And you know. all the stuff
and then the last sentence was.
"But of course.
all the cool kids
were at Secret Garden Party."
We needed to
really identify ourselves
as a bit different and we
did that wholeheartedly
with this sort of idea
that you either think
we're a bunch of wankers or
you think that looks cool.
We didn't really want a
reaction anywhere in between.
- My greatest
moment was the year
that I realized it
wasn't a secret anymore.
I was on the top of
the Ferris wheel.
looking out across
this incredible canopy
of stars below me.
And I cried. you
know. at that moment.
It was just so. so emotional.
- The first time
I went. I thought.
"Hello. It's not a
secret. It's massive."
And I know exactly where it is.
So it's not a Secret
Garden Party at all.
It's a massive sore thumb in
the middle of Cambridgeshire.
With planes flying overhead
and like really loud music
and queues for miles
and all the Tesco's
completely empty of beer.
You know. it's not secret.
- I got a text message saying.
"Is it okay. Prince William's
coming to the Garden Party.
He's gonna camp in the Garden."
Prince Harry.
- Prince Harry. Thank you.
"No. it's not okay to put
the Prince of the realm
in our Garden when we are
like. have no VIP area."
This is supposed to be. you
know. one tier and shit.
And Daisy. you actually
phoned me up and went.
"That's really not cool.
Like. he doesn't. you know.
what else does he get to do"
- "Okay. you can
come. but you're not
having a free ticket."
- Well. if he plays the
same game as everyone else.
if we book four or five
lookalikes of Prince Harry.
then not only does he get a
chance of a bit of anonymity.
we have plausible deniability
the whole fucking way.
And telling
their private security
that there's loads
of lookalike on site.
was probably one of the
funnest moments of my life.
- When I was introducing
Jarvis Cocker.
we had this pact
that Jarvis Cocker
would come to the microphone.
As he got the microphone.
Captain America and I.
would go boooom.
stage dive off the
stage. onto the crowd.
What could possibly go wrong?
So I go and tell
Jarvis Cocker the plan.
He goes. "Brilliant. Do
you want a chocolate?"
So we all had a chocolate.
And then Jarvis Cocker
comes to the microphone.
And I'm looking at my receivers.
thinking like.
eyeballing them to go.
"I'm coming. I'm coming."
I had a few seconds in
which to just sort of
translate to them. the
fact that I was about to
throw myself onto them.
And I sort of got a
few positives and a
few confused looks
but I just went for it anyway.
cause the moment
was. it was there.
So I just launched myself
up and they literally.
it was like the
red. the Red Sea.
parted and just went
peow. like a cartoon.
And I went boom and I collapsed.
almost breaking my
back on one woman
in about her sixties at tie-dye.
She just turns to
me and she goes.
"Oh my God. you're lucky
you didn't kill yourself.
I can't believe the
youngsters these days.
They've got no festival
etiquette at all. have they?"
So she saved me.
Morning guys.
So it's now day two of
Secret Garden party.
Today. I've got these amazing
trousers on from Penny Drop.
I've got a mesh body suit
and some cool stickers
in little mushroom.
- The kids came up and they
bought their outfit at Topshop.
Sure.
We got it from charity shops
and stapled it together
and painted it blue.
And then just tipped buckets
of glitter on our faces
and rolled around.
getting herpes.
But at least there was
some. you know. there was.
there was a level
of inventiveness.
- We've worked very
hard to get something
that we really
understood what we wanted
as a bunch of people.
Unfortunately. there's
a lot of voyeurs here.
not partaking...
Who are kind of just
here to watch us. right?
It's like. no. fuck off.
I don't want you to watch
me. I want you to be with me.
- And I think it's
gone through lots of.
lots of kind of waves really.
I think the rain and the
mud helped with the phases
because the weather
would be shit all weekend
and all the kind of part-time
party goers would be like.
"Oh no. I've got mud
in my furry boots."
Last night. it rained a lot.
And I mean. a lot.
Music was like pumping
all night. as well.
It was ridiculous.
Gangs of pissed
up blokes wandering around.
getting a bit rowdy
and a bit. you know.
not really in the
spirit of things.
Then word would get out that
that year had been brilliant
and the next year a load of
assholes would turn up again.
- When all the Joshua's
and Tiffany's. you know.
discount themselves on
the. on the greenery.
Sipping away on
their Buck's Fizz
as the sky turned
from blue to pink.
And then next thing you know.
it's dubstep and a
man with neck tattoos.
has a football shirt
that he's holding
above his head like that and
walking with his shoulders.
kinda moving back
and forth like this.
as his mate throws a
cider bottle in a lake.
I'm like. yeah...
What do I think about this?
You know. yeah. the
Joshua's and Tiffany's
sipping Sancerre on the green.
they were twats but at
least they were polite.
- The only one thing
that never changes.
is that everything changes.
And the reality is if you.
if you don't accept that.
things can go wrong.
Any horror stories though?
- Absolutely not.
- I remember we had one girl
who was working on our crew.
She was tripping on
acid and she had found
a security guards radio.
and she was shoving
it up her vagina. shouting.
"Fuck me now. Fuck me now."
And all of our crew
was like. "Whoa! Oh.
What do we do with you?"
And like the security
guard is like.
"Can I have my radio? I
should maybe keep the radio."
- One of the wet years.
Does everyone have stories
about the wet years?
Oh. God. I better be good then.
The mud was pretty
crazy a few years ago.
Really nuts. And it was
worst I've ever seen.
Didn't the Pagoda Stage sink?
- Did it?
- Yeah.
The Pagoda Stage sank?
- Kids in bin bags. stamping
around through just trenches.
And when you. when rains in
your face the whole time.
you have to frown. you spend
the whole day frowning.
Spend the whole day
frowning. you know?
Not good.
- I was doing a stall here and
the field was draining off.
down through the stalls.
So we dug with adjoining
people. a trench.
And I was sitting
there thinking.
this is a very. very
middle class festival
and I'm not quite sure
how I feel about this.
And just then. an extremely
pretty young girl came up.
vomited in our trench
and walked away.
And I thought. well.
maybe it is a festival.
- I was always surprised that
it never would dissuade people
from getting in the mud pit.
the fact that there was
already mud everywhere.
- We love it when it
rains at Garden Party
because we're indoors and
it means that we're packed.
- They're the real fight.
- They're the bloody fight.
The battle of the Somme.
2007. Glade Festival.
was one of the most nuts
experiences of my entire life.
I mean. we had rivers.
We went to the police and said.
"We can't keep
everyone safe. Sorry"
And the police said.
"Well. you can't evacuate
cause the roads are closed.
So you've got to
keep everyone safe."
And that kind of triggered
this Dunkirk spirit.
Yeah. I mean.
they amount to some very.
very tough days in the office.
but you do always end
up quite proud of the.
the people you're standing
shoulder to shoulder with.
- It's just that general carnage
but you're all in it together.
And you kind of just keep going
cause what else you gonna do?
- Garden Party had a lot of
rain as well. but whatever.
It's nothing compared
to what we had.
- In Duff's Bar.
in Duff's bar...
In Duff's Bar at seven
o'clock in the morning.
there is a Heras fence
with blue plastic
draped over it.
In front of the Heras
fence. in the muddy grass.
is a paddling pool full
of dirty brown water.
In that paddling pool is an
inflatable champagne bottle.
which is just meandering around
slowly in the dirty water.
under the gray skies
up against the plastic
on the Heras fence.
And five men stand around with
their hands in their pockets
staring at the little
inflatable champagne bottle.
And I sat there and watched this
and thought. "Yeah. this is ace"
There was something almost
Beckett like about this bleak.
bleak remnants of
something that may have
one time been spectacular.
Long washed out. dead.
Yeah. I fucking loved that.
Oh. the glare of fresh air.
- I remember sitting up on
this tree watching a stage
and I didn't know
the guy next to me.
but I just sat there
and I said. "Nice."
And the guy next
to me said. "Nice."
And I said. "Nice."
And he said. "Nice."
And we had. like went
through 30 different 'nices'.
It's really funny.
And then he walks off and I
never talked to him again.
And then six months
later I met him
and I realized that was Vito.
First time I met him. yeah.
- Oh really?
- He just loved that lifestyle
of being out with people.
being fun and energetic.
- 20 minutes ago. you were
looking like Father Christmas.
Now you're. you know.
Dr. Seuss or whatever.
The tragedy was this. you know.
the ying and the yang.
He did suffer from depression.
- We definitely saw eye
to eye on the world.
- The festival draw
was the party draw.
the creativity that. you
know. that suspended reality.
that escapism. drew
him in too much.
- I knew he was
struggling a little bit
with the festival scene
and I didn't know how much.
- But you never know. do you?
Yeah.
- I was meant to call him.
And then the week
later I heard the news.
- Like everyone. we
probably all thought.
"Oh God. we should
have said something.
done something or
gone down or helped."
It's all very
well if you pronounce
all these great intentions
under the black light.
but when the house lights come
on and you need to actually
follow through and
make all of that real.
otherwise it's all bullshit.
- CALM came through Freddie.
I think until Vito died.
I had absolutely
no comprehension of
the suicide rates
in men being quite so high
and quite such an issue.
The Campaign
Against Living Miserably
is for us an obvious ally.
Well. it started with
Eddie Temple-Morris.
who first mentioned it
and introduced it to me.
It fitted our ethos
of responsibility.
At CALM. we
believe you can't have
a great festival without tea.
So come say hi at this
year's Secret Garden Party.
We started giving them space
for interactive art pieces
that gave people an opportunity
to open up. engage. acknowledge
maybe some of the things
that they carried themselves.
- 'Well. I'm sorry to say so.
but sadly it's true that
Bang-ups and Hang-ups.
well. they can happen to you.'
- Bizarrely at the
time that he died.
he was at his strongest.
Now I know. quite often the
case when someone has made
that conscious decision.
they're like at their happiest.
clearest. most cognant stage.
You need to
take care of each other.
- Waiting around for
the phone to ring.
ding-a-ling. ring-ding-a-ling.
- One thing I've learnt
is to just try to listen
a little bit more to that
niggling little voice.
When someone pops in your head
a couple of times.
just call them.
Yeah.
- Well. you've probably been
told about his firework finale.
His sister got in touch.
He'd asked whether his
ashes could be scattered
at the Garden
Party or some such.
He suggested
a rather Hunter S. Thompson
style firework display.
- Nothing would give
him greater pleasure
than to know that we'd
done the nearest equivalent
we possibly could.
- Seeing Vito's firework
go up. that was great.
He would've just loved that.
He would've just loved
the sheer silliness of it.
of sending someone's ashes up
in a firework and going pew.
Perfect. Absolutely bang on.
- I just miss him madly.
The friendships
that you made here
would gravitate out
into your real life.
You wouldn't get
that love like and support
and people being that
open anywhere else.
You know. I met the
mother of my child here.
I think we probably made
that child here. I think.
When you've got
that many people projecting
that amount of love.
it's very overwhelming.
- Will you marry me?
- Fucking yes!
The amount of
relationships and friendships
and businesses and
skills and careers
that were kind of born here.
make it like just one of those
really. really special places
for a really big
crew of friends.
- There maybe that
weird kind of. you know.
naked ping-pong
tent that they made
becomes like. you know.
takes over the world
as crazy international business.
- Secret Garden ending
is a sad chapter.
- The last dance
and the last party.
everyone was just crying.
There will be
people who will remember
Secret Garden as a place
where they first fell in love.
There will be people
there who remember it
for the wild shag that they had.
- I've got laid quite a
lot at Secret Garden Party.
So I've got to thank
it just for that.
Why are you stopping it?
Why not keep doing it?
One of the
reasons we didn't fight on
is we never wanted
to be that festival
that wasn't as good
as it used to be.
We'd always said we'd pull
it if we got to that point.
- Secret Garden created a model.
which I truly believe. if
you look around the world.
lots of people are doing now.
Festivals had a certain format
and then Secret
Garden came along
and that format changed.
- More and more festivals
are now selling tickets
because of the production and
the non-music entertainment.
rather than those
big headliners.
That worked until
I think what we were doing
then became part of the norm.
But I think times have changed.
There certainly wasn't Facebook.
There wasn't YouTube
and then all the rest.
The currency of how you
presented your life online
and that being mainly
photos took a massive role
in people's lives.
I think an event like ours
with such a rich backdrop.
that was certainly
a plus for us.
but I don't think we credited
that we were losing control
of how we were
presenting ourselves.
We were getting accusations
of having sold out.
It was. you know.
diametrically opposite online.
People going. "That's
brilliant. We love you guys."
Or. "That's awful. You're
a bunch of tossers."
You become a bucket list event.
A sort of festival
republic machine.
where you are just trying
to churn out what's popular
rather than help
create what's popular.
- This was exactly
the right move.
Rather than slip into
some kind of obscurity.
- Yeah. the horse wasn't lame
but shoot it anyway.
The Garden man. long
live the Garden.
Going out with a bang
was always gonna be preferable.